So, some very exciting news when it
comes to Total War, Rome II is actually
going to be getting some updates and it
probably applies to a lot of the older
historical titles as well, be it Shogun
Attila, you name it. So, let's get into
it. So, all this comes off the back of a
show and tell live stream that Creative
Assembly did, which I've taken notes on
here. Uh let's get into it. For the most
part, it's going to be covering, well,
what is this new update strategy they
have to existing titles uh and
particularly when it comes to Rome II,
what do they have in mind when it comes
to refreshing the battles, the visuals,
and the campaign? So, let's get into it
here. So, that as part of this live
stream, they went over a new role that
exists in Creative Assembly. It's called
the back catalog product owner.
And it's an interesting position and
it's going to be headed up by Jack
Lusted. So, his history, you can see him
here, very dapper gentleman, uh dresses
nicely, but has a long history working
in the Total War series going all the
way back to Rome I and Medieval being a
modder. Uh he was on the Total War
Center. He did some design work uh for
the units for Napoleon, and he was
actually uh leading the development in
Rome Emperor Edition, game director of
Thrones of Britannia. So, he's had his
hands in the guts of these older Total
War titles, which is which is necessary
obviously if you're going to come and
replumb their depths and seek to improve
them.
Uh the one caveat to this new title and
new directive is actually he said that
he's a team of one. So, he's like a solo
developer, uh kind of like a modder, but
with the resources of Creative Assembly
at his back. So, it's not clear if he's
going to get help uh to support him in
his endeavors. Presumably, he can tap on
company resources when it comes to art,
sound, other things like that, maybe
some expertise, maybe some legwork of
junior devs. Um but yeah, he's basically
the main person on this team. Uh so,
it's a tall order. But essentially, what
is his prerogative? Well, the idea is to
go back and refresh these older titles.
Start with Rome There was a mention of
maybe Attila and Shogun And
And what are they going to be updating?
Well, they said this is this is, you
know, good news for us. They say it's
free updates to the game. So, visual
fixes, bug fixes, battle campaign. And
this is not paid DLC. And the idea is to
go back and bring polish and
reinvigorate some of these older titles,
do some well-needed uh and long-overdue
fixes, at least as far as he can do it
as a solo dev uh member. So, that's
really exciting for me. Uh I do have
some reservations for this because,
well, one, how much can he do as a solo
dev? Is there a lot of stuff like
optimization in Attila that's just
beyond his scope that would be great to
fix? He just doesn't have the resources
to do it. But, presumably, if he himself
can show that there's value in this, and
then it drives sales to, say for
instance, Rome 2, then maybe he can get
more people added to his team, and then
eventually this grows into a
longer-standing uh sort of group uh of
dev uh people. Maybe Sofia office could
help as well.
Um so, yeah, that's mostly it. Um and
then, yeah, now we can go into, well,
what are they offering for Rome 2? And
actually, one last caveat here is to say
that this is mostly going to be aimed at
um there's an exclusion here, so it's
not for Warhammer, and it's not for
in-development titles. So, that's
essentially his his prerogative. It's
basically older historical titles.
>> [snorts]
>> Okay, getting into Rome 2, what are they
going to cover? So, they said that the
goal here is to work through a
progressive sort of like beta phase,
targeting different areas.
So, you have uh beta for Mars, which is
going to be battle, beta for Venus,
which is visuals, and then beta for
Jupiter, which is going to be the
campaign. And then after that, they
bundle it all up into a Pantheon update.
So, for the Mars update, uh there's a
lot of details we'll get into shortly,
but it's changing things like uh the
impacts of morale, flanking, and
terrain, uh how tired your units are,
how things play out in the battle. So, a
lot of tweaking and dialing of the
mechanics to bring a polish that we've
seen in later titles. And a lot of stuff
that's proven uh to be true or
innovative in new titles, they can now
go back and re-add in those lessons
learned. Um they're also doing some bug
fixes and things like that, which is
great.
Uh Venus is visuals, so update to
campaign graphics, textures, lighting,
uh the water maps, uh and then they're
going to be doing a sort of a a UI
reskin inspired by Roman villa
paintings, presumably more as we get
there. The main fix right now is going
to be for Mars battles. Jupiter takes a
closer look at a lot of campaign systems
taking the updates they did to Imperator
Rome and rolling back some of those or
tweaking them or bringing more
innovations. So, public order,
making systems more impactful,
re-changing
the building tree so that they're
longer, the changes are more important,
but they branch later on so it's more
organic how you kind of develop your
civilization. And they want to make this
stuff fun in the late game. So, a lot of
work there. And then finally, there was
here an acknowledgement of well, what
does this all mean for long-existing
mods that people rely upon? And first,
Jack acknowledged that hey, you know, he
was a modder in the past, he understands
how disruptive this can be.
And he wants to make sure that he
communicates these changes well in
advance of the mod team
that are there for existing mods can
make updates.
And he said the goal here is to have one
big update for the Pantheon update so
that the mods just have to do the update
once to reflect all the kind of back-end
changes that he's doing. That's great.
But he does also recognize that not all
modders are going to be active or aware
that this is happening. And so, for
those legacy mods that are not going to
get updated, he said that there is going
to be a pre-Pantheon version of the game
that's going to be always available in
case you want to roll back your game to
stay compatible with mods as you were
before they came in and did these
changes. All right, now let's get into
the specifics of what they're proposing
for Rome 2. I pulled this from both the
live stream and actually on the blog
space. So, let's go over Mars, the
battles. So, basically what they're
saying here is high-level for battles,
they want battles to be more impactful
and to have a lot of the polish of newer
titles. So, what that means for them is
a focus on making flanking, fatigue, and
morale more important and more
rewarding. At the same time, they do
recognize that as they make these
tweaks, it could potentially make
battles go faster, and so they're making
other tweaks to keep the pacing of
battles at around 10 to 15 minutes.
Um so, yeah, that's all looking good.
Now, um some specific changes we'll go
ahead and hit these uh just in order.
So, one thing that they're bringing in
from Attila is going to be critical
hits. So, this is something where kind
of there's a like a roll of the dice
behind the scenes that could mean that I
think you do like 5x the amount of
damage. And so, they like this added
feature from Attila because it means
that battles are a lot less predictable,
more real-life stake. A lucky arrow or a
lucky stab, uh we'll see people just
drop uh and die. So, they've brought
that in. Um then uh they've reworked
sort of how armor and damage systems are
calculated.
This one is worth getting into. They
spent a lot of the time showing how this
works. Essentially, the old system was
like this. So, I've added the axes that
were missing in the in the talk, but
basically, previously how this worked in
simulations is the more armor you had,
this is the average damage. You can see
that, you know, an early investment in
armor had a big change, but then over
time, the more armor you stacked, it
just had less influence. So, what
they're trying to do with the new system
is to make it more linear so that every
incremental investment in armor does
have actually practical impacts. Uh they
went over
some of the details of how this works
behind the scenes, but I'm like a visual
person, so I went ahead and I broke this
out into a diagram. So, the new way how
armor is calculated and plays into uh
battle determinations is like this. So,
let's say you look at your unit card and
there's an armor of 90. You pull that
armor in here, and then you take a roll.
And the roll essentially says how much
of that armor is actually going to be
attributed towards deflecting a blow.
So, your minimum armor is going to be 50
and 100. It does a roll, so in this
case, let's say the system rolled and I
got a value of somewhere in the middle,
73. So, that's going to be my armor in
this particular attack, what armor I
pull for my calculations. Then you say,
"Okay, of this armor,
how much is it going to be mitigating
the damage done?" So, the way they do
this is this is a 73 armor, which says
out of 100, you know, potential damage,
you can take away 73 hits. So, the end
result is 27%. So, they take that 27%
and whatever damage you were initially
going to do, so let's say you did a an
armor strike a or an attack strike of
100, you now have a damage modifier
where it goes all the way down to 27%.
So, that's how they've reworked things.
It's a little bit more streamlined and
apparently it make things just work more
linearly. Uh and this is how you get the
desired results. And then when it comes
to armor piercing, basically it's the
same system, but in this case,
um you just take this damage modifier
and you double it. So, basically armor
is half as effective as it would be
otherwise. So, it seems like they're
cleaning things up to make it a little
bit more intuitive and have better
performance. So, I like this. I like the
fact that they're not scared to show
some of the nitty-gritties behind the
scene.
Um so, what else have they done? So,
there's some little tweaks in here. Pike
phalanx, how it behaves. Uh shield armor
values, they're now attributing it just
to melee defense and missile block
chance and not having it actually go
towards that armor calculation we just
talked about. Uh they're changing some
abilities in here. Uh so, formed attack
apparently was kind of buggy or causing
issues. So, it looks like they uh just
removed it. And then now what they're
doing is they are reworking some of the
spears. So, they're taking stuff we've
seen from later titles like Three
Kingdoms to have better
uh charge defen- defense and reflection
against cavalry charges. And then even
uh spears, if they're braced, it means
that horses will just rear up and refuse
to charge. So, I've grabbed a little bit
of screenshot of what that looked like
for Three Kingdoms. I think that sort of
performance is a lot more realistic when
it comes to history, more intuitive
gameplay. Spears have a better role even
if they're cheap spears.
If they're sturdy, they can ward off
cavalry, really force them to go around
the flanks, or expose unbra- uh or
exploit unbraced uh unbraced units.
So, that overall is a good change. Um,
again, like I said, they're changing
around around morale to have increased
importance for flanking and terrain. In,
uh, Rome II,
uh, historically, I think they were
having issues where morale really wasn't
a factor if you did all the work to get
around behind someone's flank, it really
didn't do that much as much as recent
titles, so they're tweaking that so it
behaves more like a modern title.
Um, so I'm all approving of that, and
they've taken a key out of, uh, I think
it was Troy and Pharaoh really dialed
this in.
But, basically having a unit's mass
really play into their, uh, their
fatigue and how much they can move, so
it's much more, uh, influential so that
light units can really dart around the
flank and get out of the way, and
perhaps even, you know, outmaneuver you
versus your heavy units, uh, can take a
punch, take a hit, but they're not going
to be chasing anyone anytime soon. So, I
like that. Uh, in addition to that, to
drive home more differentiation, they
were actually changing, uh, unit
spacing.
So, here's the before and after. It's a
little bit hard to see, but if you zoom
in, basically what they're doing is
across the board they're changing the
unit spacing. So, your elite heavy units
are going to be very tight, very,
uh, coalesced units, and then the more
you get into the medium class, and then
the light class, the more kind of varied
and spread out they are going to be.
This is a feature that I think is really
good for intuitive, uh, understanding of
units at a distance. You don't have to
bring up the unit card, you can see, oh,
this is a light unit, it's spaced out, I
can probably take them out, versus, oh,
look how disciplined and cohesive this
force is, it's probably a heavy unit.
So, I like that intuitive decide design
so you don't have to open up the, uh,
unit card to understand more.
Uh, so that's looking great.
Uh, and then some last little important
fixes here are going to be changes to
how AI deploys its armies. Hopefully,
this prevents issues where
reinforcements were behaving in a wonky
way, or you could get AI where it would
form its army and then keep reshuffling
its units. So, stuff like that is really
great. Uh, and then finally, some
well-needed fixes when it comes to
ramming issues at naval battles. Um
there's probably a lot more bugs that
aren't mentioned here, but you know,
they're probably going to tap into the
community to see what other bugs you
guys want fixed. And then Jack will have
to do his best to prioritize and get
those covered.
One place he could probably do that
would be reaching out to the mod team. A
lot of important bugs have probably been
addressed by mods at this point in time.
So hopefully he has a good connection
with the modding community.
All right. So that's going to be the
Mars update. Then we get into the visual
update here.
So one of the things they said is
they're re-skinning the UI to be more
like painted walls in Roman villas to be
more immersive and have more consistency
to look of buttons and interactive
elements. So they did not preview this,
but at the bottom here what I've done
is, you know, pull up some reference
images so we can maybe dream or start to
think about what this might look like.
So here's what you see in the
traditional Rome 2 UI.
Where yes, it is pretty consistent, but
it looks like kind of very basic symbols
that are more kind of like painted vase
styles, which I kind of like. But if
they can push it even further and
integrate more about the Roman
painting system like this that you see
in villas, which is very pops of color
but with a little bit of like kind of
tattered texture work on it. If they can
put that across the whole UI and just
make it more uniform and actually show
off that hey,
you know, maybe there's some modern UI
elements as well to make it seem like a
title that's not locked in the past. Uh
so I like that. Other updates they're
making as well
is basically campaign textures are
leveraging the work done for Troy and
Pharaoh. Campaign and battle lighting
are improved as well. So more visual
clarity, night battles are better to
play, overall more consistent tone and
saturation. Here's an example of this of
the before and after. So this stands out
where you can see the ocean has some
updates. Looks smoother, cleaner. Uh the
way the lighting interacts with the the
terrain uh just looks like it merges
with the terrain a lot better.
Uh it's a lot less muddy and maybe
stark.
Um so yeah, just better visuals there
Uh and some lighting updates and yeah,
it's overall good little bit of polish
that might be overlooked by most, but
for people who love these titles, it's a
welcome change.
Uh, another thing they did spot is that
in some places the way the map is
painted on the campaign level is
different from the battle. So, for
instance, they were saying that there
might be a battle here where you would
fight this and you would think you'd be
fighting in grassland or woodland, but
when it you go to the battle,
it's a desert environment. So, they're
saying that they're re-skinning
the campaign map to better reflect how
the battles actually are.
So, here is a before and after where
it's more accurate now. So, great.
Overall more polish.
Uh, then after that you get into
Jupiter, which is probably going to be
the more substantial one for the
long-term campaign players. Jupiter is
all going to be around basically
changing your Well, there's a lot of
things, but most of it is going to be
around
how buildings work, their perks,
how they unlock. It's a lot of stuff
where basically the main thrust of what
they're trying to do is essentially make
it so that
um,
the decisions sort of ramp up over time
and a good way to show this is down
here. So, for instance, these are the
kind of revised tech trees and they have
or not tech trees, building slots
trees. So, they have for instance maps
here for all the Roman buildings and the
main takeaway is that these chains are
now deeper or longer, I guess you could
say. So, instead of being, you know,
maybe a decision of three,
that gets evolved, it could go up to
four and maybe even five.
So, they're extending these change uh,
these chains and then one thing they've
learned from more recent titles is that
people prefer if the branching decisions
that you have to make are not up front,
but kind of happen progressively over
time. So, it's really like a tree that
expands over time, which makes it a lot
easier to ramp up into this and make
your decisions later. They're also kind
of reconfiguring where uh benefits of
these systems go. So, instead of having
something that's a you know, a branch is
one
uh set of perks exclusively, they're
trying to share those. So, it's a little
bit more nuanced, but basically um
yeah, we could go into some of the notes
here that explain it better, but that's
basically it. Extended chains branch
branch later.
And uh yeah, they have the Roman stuff
as an example. So, again, we'll go over
this just as the key details of as
they've noted it.
So, um yeah, let's look specifically at
the building chains before we go back to
the main list. So, here it says uh they
simplified recruitment chains to benefit
the player and the AI. Keep the number
of chains available very similar to the
current ones. Um extend chains. Yeah, we
talked about that. Have more branch
chains later. So, this was a lesson
learned from Three Kingdoms. And this I
thought was pretty important that um
some of these later branches that you
have to do are not just decisions, but
they're actually going to be tied to the
technology unlocks. So, they're trying
to make technology more impactful in the
building tree. So, I like that. Making
systems that otherwise might have fallen
off the wayside, um try and reinvigorate
them, make them have better deeper
connection, more important purpose. So,
I like the idea of bringing uh tech
decisions into allowing you to unlock
certain build chains or at least better
integrating that.
Uh bonuses here they say are going to be
throughout the chain and not just
specific branches. So, trying to make it
um yeah, clearer bonuses. And then they
say have more impactful uh resources on
on your buildings. Uh let's see. Have
more impact from resources on building
choices. Okay. So, yeah, it's been a
while. I'm a little rusty on the
mechanics of kind of the [snorts]
campaign of Rome, but hopefully this
rings true for a lot of people. Again, I
recommend checking out the blog post
about this to learn more. But yeah, a
lot of rebalancing here, looking at
victory conditions, late game stuff to
make sure that uh it's still a challenge
and it's rewarding gameplay and that
mechanics don't fall off uh
out of relevance.
See, that's basically it. That's
exciting to me for something that is
like quality of life improvements that
we'll see for Rome 2. I'm hoping that
again, uh Jack will have more resources
in the future that so that we can see
more stuff added like more units, more
factions, more stuff like that. But
again, they uh Creative Assembly is not
going to be do be doing this for free
until they see some return on investment
on this type of thing. So, obviously ROI
is going to be on driving sales to Rome
2 and it's DLC if it's just a more
polished game. But then probably an ROI
that they're seeing is just rebuilding
trust in the community. So again, on
both those marks, if you want to see
more resources uh given to Jack, uh we
need to buy stuff if we think it's worth
it and we need to give them positive
feedback uh when they think they've
earned it. So, that's all great. And
then later, this would be an open
question to me, which is what games are
they going to touch next? Are they going
to go to Attila, Shogun 2,
older titles? For me, Attila, the main
one is going to be obviously
optimization. This is one of the things
that it played like, you know, terribly
in a lot of instances. Uh so, I'm hoping
that this is something that Jack can get
the resources around to really improve
Attila because mechanically Attila is
great, but it has a lot of optimization
issues.
Uh and then when it comes to Shogun,
this is, you know, by uh a lot of
people's estimation, a really solid
game,
but still some of its systems are a
little antiquated. So for me, that might
be, you know, re-tweaking how the AI
works. Diplomacy is somewhat flat in
Shogun 2. And then maybe even trying to
come up on some twists on the realm
divide and maybe some other late game
stuff that uh yeah, I think would change
the game and yeah, there's a lot of new
stuff that they've inno- innovated from
uh newer titles that I think obviously
why not retroactively have these lessons
learned uh applied. So yeah, this is all
really good stuff.
That about covers it for the Rome 2
update. Stay tuned for my other videos
where we'll cover more stuff from the
show and tell when it comes to Medieval
3 and Warhammer 40,000. So, I will see
you guys in the next one and it's a good
time for us historical players and for
people who love Rome 2, which I am among
them. So, I'll see you in the next one.
Bye.